 Welcome to the podcast today. This is Mark Voorhies with Cyber Winds. I'm here with Joe or Joe Orlando, who's gonna share some of his great knowledge with us and some of the things to do with, uh, his experience in the past. But Joe, a thanks for joining. We're really pleased that you spend the time to talk with us.

And b, thanks for sharing some of your cyber wins and things that have gone on your career. We really, really appreciate it.

Thank you for having me. I'm really impressed. Thank you very much. I appreciate the opportunity. Let me give you a sense of, um, I'm, I'm old and gray. I've been around before. Cyber was really a topic. Uh, back in the day of, I was with IBMI was with Motorola, I've been with PricewaterhouseCoopers, so I've been around a while.

And I was a data warehouse, SME or subject matter expert back in 1997 and back in those days, uh. Really, cybersecurity was not a conversation. The best idea that they had in those days was, let's just encrypt the data. Then we can walk away and its job is done. Over the years though, we have learned that there's access controls, there's identity authorizations, there's who has the ability to get to the data. Uh, it's gotten more and more complicated. So over the course of all of these years, since 1996, and I'm showing my age, uh, it has evolved to where now it's a bigger thing. It has become such a big thing that you have insurance companies specializing in cybersecurity, uh, insurance. have regulators who are pushing and pushing for cybersecurity due diligence right now, there's a program called Gov Ramp. states have agreed on what criteria vendors have to meet in order to be certified to sell their product into these 26 states. FDA has new rules. All these regulators have come out with new rules, and they're getting more and more stringent. What's happening therefore is all the vendors, all the customers, everybody in the area that holds data, which today is almost everybody except for maybe a parking meter. happening is everybody is now having to look at how do I make sure that I can answer the question? Is my data secure when it's with you? And that's where I've spent majority of the last decade and a half, is addressing privacy. access controls, add, addressing data leakage, data protection, addressing breaches. Uh, and the biggest thing has really come down to how do I make sure that we have people who are really non-technical folks, really aware and sensitive to impact. breaches can have. So I won't go into that today. Uh, everybody loves to tell war stories. Everybody likes to talk about how, gee, this was terrible, this happened, and so many people were outta work because this state of breach happened, et cetera. That's all well news. I'm on the other end trying to either prevent it or prepare for it. So today I wanted to just share one in which, uh. It's a little unusual because I get a lot of looks when I go in and I meet with people on something called incident response planning. Incident response planning is what do I do when I find that I have a cybersecurity breach, whether it's somebody has my credentials and they're logging in from the Cayman Islands, somebody has internally taken data and gone someplace they're not supposed to be. Whether or not ransomware or Trojan. Bug virus has gone in and made it so that I can't get to my data. incident response plan is the secret. The secret is can't be sure to prevent all of these things. The changes in this world are constant. AI has changed it. They can actually push two or three buttons and walk away and have AI try and figure out how to breach. How to break passwords, how to do brute force entry. It's become too easy for anybody to do this kind of thing that what's happening is you cannot predict and comfortably, responsibly say, yes, I'm 100% secure. So I went to the other side saying, okay, let's presume worst case scenario, what is that called?

It was a, a pound, a penny of, was it, pound of. That's it. That's it. Uh, so the idea here is, okay, we've gotta be ready for it. So we've gone down a path for the last five to seven years when I work on this area called a thoughtless incident response plan. And then I pause for, for just effect people.

What do you mean thoughtless? intent is, is that most incident response plans that I reviewed uh, are very concise. They're very short. It can be 12 pages, eight pages. I've seen someone that are four pages. I've seen some that are 18 pages, and they sit back comfortably going, I've got it. I have an incident response plan. I like to preach that if your response plan is not 50 pages or larger, you don't have an incident response plan, an idea, you have a summary page, you have a few things. The thoughtless incident response plan is one in which it provides so much detail. puts a RACI together as to who's responsible, who needs to be communicated with, what are their actions that they're supposed to be taking?

What training do they have to know what their actions are, that when there is an incident, I know all I've got to do is what kind of incident is it? I flip over to that incident response plan and I say, okay, this is a breach. Or this is ransomware or this is credential stolen. And I start reading and I say, well, okay, I gotta notify Mary. Mary then tells Jim, Jim goes to Bob. This guy cuts off credentials. This guy shuts this down and notifies the executives. This person has to tell whoever's in charge of communication, and this is what they should down to the point where. Templates are already created before there's an incident that says, if I have to tell shareholders, if I have to tell the media, here's a template that's already been approved by legal run by everybody, and they've all agreed on the verbiage and says, this is how we'll communicate this incident. Think about it.

It's almost like making, it's, it's like making chocolate chip cookies.

Absolutely. Great analogy. Great analogy. Because too often what happens is nobody thinks of this. And when it does happen, now you have a whole bunch of people in a room going, okay, we gotta tell people, what do we tell them? Now the thinking starts in the middle of a crisis. This is what you should say. Well, I don't like the way that's worded.

Well, this is what we think we should say. Well, no I don't. Let's do all that in a calm area when there's no incident. way. We've already gone through it. We've known how to say it, who to say it to, who's supposed to say it, and that way employees

And.

not supposed to talk to the media, not supposed to talk to customers, but have it down to that level of detail that all I really gotta do is what I'm supposed to do in the event of a certain incident. What my actions are that I have to take, what authority I have or who do I go to for authorizations and approvals and everything is so spelled out. Like you said, with the recipe. If I follow the recipe, calm. Everybody knows what's supposed to happen. Everybody is simple. There's no fire drill, there's no running around with the ha hair on fire.

It's real simple. It says, okay, we are now at at step G. And at step G, this occurs. And at step H this occurs, and at Step I, this occurs. And everybody can calmly say, we've already walked through this. We know what to expect. We know what we're supposed to do. And the bottom line is the event becomes less harrowing and more controlled.

How, how often do you recommend actually, um.

You'd be surprised how many people don't practice it at all, to be honest with you, because people change jobs. People are no longer in their jobs. So what happens is where I had Bill spelled out to do X, Y, Z, and bill's no longer with us, then everybody has to be, well, what do we do now? I like to see, I would like to see that everybody looks and reviews this every six months at a minimum. That way you really know that we've updated it. We've addressed, there's new tools and new technologies that we've implemented before the plan was written. Now the plan doesn't include that. So now we have different capabilities we didn't have, for example, uh. This kind of scanning tool that now we're getting, well, now we can integrate that into the plan. So all of these things, because our environment, our people change, our environment, change our system and capabilities change should be integrated into this plan so that it's reviewed and updated on a regular basis. And at the very least, once a year, let's do a tabletop. And it doesn't have to take long.

Oh.

a big deal.

How about the difference between, you know, small medium business, which, you know, 500 to a thousand, 1500 type employees versus large business, which is a hundred thousand plus. How, how do you see the difference in those kind of plans? Um, because, you know, we, we have a fairly, quite a broad audience, right?

And it could go down to 2030, uh, customer companies, it could be up to well into the Fortune 500. How do you see the difference for, you know. Folks move from organization to organization between a small incident response plan and what could potentially be very large as.

Philosophically, I like to think it's, it's pretty much the same. Uh. You don't wanna missteps, you don't want to not have certain things covered. So wherever I'm a 15 man operation, I still have customers, I still have legal requirements, I still have media reputation to deal with. So a lot of the facets are pretty much the same.

Now, how involved they are can be impacted by the size of the operation. If I'm a Fortune 500 with stockholders and I'm on the New York Stock Exchange and I can't expect the financial times to call me. Then I'll act differently than a much smaller organization where the financial times won't be bringing me up. Uh, but I do have customers and I do have third party vendors. There's another piece, forgive me for bouncing around here. of us have third party vendors and supply chain, and we don't remember to tell them we've had this breach or we aren't working with them to make sure that the breach doesn't occur through them. So it really does come back to most of the facets are the same, irrespective of the size of the business. It's the amount and magnitude of the action taken is driven by the business itself.

Another question. Um, sorry for the questions. If, if you're a small organization, and this is something that you're just starting on the table, how do you recommend getting started? What's, how get off.

A healthy sense of paranoia. put a bunch of people in a room with a whiteboard and let's write down everything potentially that can go wrong. So if you can write back and say, okay, I have an internal threat. I have my credentials stolen, uh, I have ransomware. Take these and look at them and say, okay, what's the one that we're most afraid of right now? Ransomware I don't think would happen in some of the smaller operations 'cause it's just not that kind of return in there. But if I have a breach credentials and somebody has just encrypted my files, they've gotten in and they've either deleted them or made it so I can't access to it. Good place to start.

Now let's just sit back for a moment. Everybody in the room has a voice let's just talk about all the negative things that could possibly happen. We're not gonna say that. No, that can't occur. Anything can occur. But then you start going through the process saying, okay, where's that data reside?

What's that information look like? How are we doing it now? Where could they possibly do it? So, imagine. All the worst case scenarios, and then start looking at how do you tick the boxes and say, okay, this is a control we can put in place to avoid this. This is a control in place, and now you've eliminated those because you feel comfortable that they can't happen easily. Now the ones that are exposed, you sit there and go, now what do we do? So yes. In fact, I have an internal employee who's absolutely upset. He's either taken our client list or he is an he's. Corrupted our database so that we can't function well. That's a reasonable one to look at. What do we do? And then just start laying it out. finds out he, this is the first place we're gonna notice it is either network monitoring or a database. Administrator's gonna notice it, or some user's gonna tell you, I can't access it. Just take that scenario every step along the way without skipping any steps. So you build that recipe, as you said, and say, okay, what happens when we discover that that data is no longer available to us?

Who needs to be contacted? Who needs to act? What actions should they take? And are they really aware that they need to take these actions? You might have a system admin who doesn't know what he's supposed to do. An occasion like this, make sure he's trained and he has a playbook. So it really does come down to let's do an exercise of the worst magnitude, be as paranoid as possible, and then you'll feel a lot more comfortable.

'cause you don't wanna be in the middle of an incident. Go. didn't think of that. We want to think of

Sure.

possibly happened.

I was in a, uh, uh, uh, incident response plan engagement, I don't know, five or six years ago with a big co I live in Phoenix, Arizona with a big manufacturing, big manufacturing company. And there were, you know, all their teams and presidents and vice presidents and sales and CEO in a room. And their room was actually bordered on the corner of the parking lot with wind floor to ceiling windows on two sides.

And about halfway through the meeting, I made the comment. Do you think that cybersecurity and the location of this window is probably not a good thing? Like imagine what would happen if you had a really angry customer and you're all sitting in this room and the room got really quiet for a second and after lunch they moved it to a different room.

But some of those things, having an outside observer, right? Someone that's not part of the, the conversation all of the time that just looks around and just asked a couple extra questions, in my opinion, can be valuable. How do you see that the physical security and the cybersecurity sometimes meshing for those programs.

Oh, it, it's imperative. You, you, you have an excellent example there. I can give you several others that are similar. You have folks who, uh, don't think about the fact that yes, I have an internet connection coming into my building on the northeast corner, and I have two connections. Guess what? They both come in on the northeast corner. You sit there going, okay, did not anybody ask that question. You need a curmudgeon. You need somebody who will ask that devil. Advocate question. questions that come in and say, all right. He comes into the building and then it goes up through this junction box. You're looking for that single point of failure. You're looking for that chance to say, what if that column right there catches on fire, or the sprinklers go off right there and you just shot that junction box to where it can't function anymore. Now a 40,000 square foot building is out of commission because one room has the fire sprinklers on and it just took the whole building down.

So it really does take some curmudgeon mentality that says, alright, I'm gonna be the guy who says, well, what about. what about, and I like to be wrong, I love to be able to ask six questions and have five, all six say, got it covered. Not a problem. But if you can persistent in saying, well, what about, what about, inevitably you're gonna find may not be the question you ask, but somebody say, well, that doesn't occur, but. And then you say, now let's take that thread and pull it. So it really does. Let's just not try and fool ourselves that it's all covered, everything's fine. Let's try and scare ourselves so that we're prepared.

If, if you had to give, like I said, uh, two or three recommendations of holes where you see in, in previous, um, uh, uh, plan, plan, plans and planning, you know, what are the two things that kind of boil to the surface for you that you'd say, Hey, maybe as you pull threads, start with these two things as an example.

The biggest one I see persistent is communication. building, building a communication path. Building a communication tree that says, okay, this communication goes to all employees. This communication's just for it. This communication is for management. This communication's for legal, this communication goes to all the leadership and executives.

This communication goes to public. This communication goes to third parties. We really need to take the time to get that granular so that there is a communications plan that says here's what happens in each one of those instances, because inevitably I've discovered that communication is the thing that falls.

So you wind up having everybody think they all should be on the same teams channel and go through thread after thread after thread. No, no, no, no, no. teams channel. If you're going teams. That says, this is the only information we give to leadership. They don't need to understand the forensic ability of what the network connection look like, except they just need to know what's happening.

How long will it take to resolve, what should I do? area besides communication that tends to be an issue is just the whole idea of, of the plan training. How do I make sure that everybody knows their responsibilities, how they're supposed to act, et cetera, and what they're supposed to do, where they're supposed to put that information. So that everybody has it. You're not chasing people around saying, well, what's happening now? What's happening now? It should be real simple that the, the levels of management should be easily accessible to go into certain places and say, this is what I need to know, and I don't need to know everything.

That's part of the problem. A lot of executives think, oh, well, I gotta have every bit of information. That's not necessarily always the case. ignorance can be bliss, but sometimes also it provides you a lot of latitude.

Well, first of all, that's a great story and great, great advice. We really appreciate, you know, you condensing your, since 1996. You may be a year or two older than me, but we're about the same age. We've been doing this a long time. Thank you for putting those into words that others can use in the last couple of minutes.

Summary, any other, uh, sage pieces of advice you'd like to add And, and, uh, we'd just like to thank you for being on the, the podcast and maybe in a couple of months you'll join us again with one, some more of your knowledge, if you don't mind.

No, no, I appreciate only other area that I can tell you that. Is is on people's minds now, is everybody has to do due diligence. Uh, we either, as a customer, as a vendor, as an insurer, as a regulator, and the amount of effort going into this is growing all the time, and it's become, uh, almost tedious because the questions are the same. all following a security cybersecurity framework. what happens is a lot of folks just kind of act glibly about the idea that these are requirements, it's gonna grow exponentially, and we really need to make sure that everybody has prepared for the fact that get your ducks in a row. It's one thing to say, I am ready, but when somebody says, prove it. Now you have to go see Bill. Who sees Tom? Whos Jerry, who sees Sam, whos Mary? No, no. Let's go ahead and put all of those evidence and artifacts together that says, yes, I do have evidence of the fact that I have a business recovery plan and it's executable. I do have evidence that I have used secure software development. All that stuff is nice to say I have, I can pretty much bet in most cases, those are policies that were written eight years ago that are no longer even valid. So that would be the last piece of advice I'd provide.

It's great advice my friend. Really appreciate it. Thanks for sharing. Like I said, some cyber wins for you. We really appreciate it and looking forward to talk to you in the future.

pleasure,

my friend.

Thank you very much. Take care.

Bye.

​